---
title: What's with the logo?
layout: page
permalink: /logo/
---

I wanted to use a stylized Martini glass, complete with olive, as the logo
for this site (a reference to the logo I designed for the software company a
friend and I wanted to start in 6th/7th grade), but I haven't been able to
get the look just right (either digital or on paper). But one day, I got
another idea.

I was lying sick in my bed and listening to the audiobook version of Neal
Stephenson's Anathem. That book tells of a first-contact scenario on an
Earth-like planet, where mathematicians take a monastic role. The
first-contact spaceship has on it a graphical proof of "Adrakhones'
Theorem," which I believe is it safe to assume is what we call the
Pythagorean theorem.

While listening to this, and feeling too unpleasant to do actual work, I got
thinking about how important the Pythagorean theorem is in my own work (it
underlies the standard definition of "distance", which is fundamental to all
real-space simulations). I also realized that I wasn't sure that I knew how
to prove it.

Ten minutes pondering in my head while listening to the audiobook, and
another couple minutes sketching in a notebook, and I came up with a picture
like what you see in the logo above. I suspect that Stephenson was thinking
more of the visual proof attributed to Euclid (perhaps something like [this
image from Wikipedia][wiki]). However, I find the visuals in mine to be both
more compact and more appealing. There's nothing novel in my proof: I
believe it dates back at least to 9th century savant [Thabit ibn
Qurra][ibnQurra] (if not before).  For a lot more interesting reading on the
Pythagorean theorem, I suggest taking a look at the collection of proofs
over at [Cut-the-knot.org][cutknot]. My proof is closely related to proof #2
from that page. Perhaps someday I'll add something here to describe it more
explicitly -- until then, I'm sure I've left enough hints for the clever
reader to figure it out.

[wiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Illustration_to_Euclid%27s_proof_of_the_Pythagorean_theorem2.svg
[ibnQurra]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Th%C4%81bit_ibn_Qurra
[cutknot]: http://www.cut-the-knot.org/pythagoras/
